Wednesday, August 2nd. Testing, testing,
testing. Wednesday, August 2nd. Testing.
Testing, testing, two. Testing, two. Testing,
two. Testing.
Today is August the 2nd. And I have the great honor
of chatting with Roland Gonzalez. Ralph. I'm
sorry, Ralph. Son is Ralph. Ralph Gonzalez, class
of 53. As we begin, sir, tell this machine about
your family background, your parents, where did
they grow up, and where did you live, and so forth,
growing up. Well, my mother came over from Mexico
when she was two years old. And they came over.
There was no restrictions on immigration at the
southern and northern borders of the United
States. However, there were on the east coast and
the west coast. And so, people would go across a
bridge in Laredo free and back and forth until
1910. So my mother came over with her four brothers
and her father and mother, and they came on a horse
and wagon. They got to San Antonio. I don't know how
long the trip took, but there was no place to stay.
So they stayed at one of the missions. because of
the marauding Indians and safety. And then from
then on they looked around and found a place to
live. So my grandfather was, as you probably know,
the field of education in Mexico was almost nil.
And the people were just lettering. Not that they
were dumb, they just didn't have the facilities to
go to school. So my grandfather, that's my
mother's father, still had his horse and wagon.
And he, I don't know how he got it, but he was real
light-complexed. He looked more like Anglo than
Hispanic, blue eyes, brown hair. And he'd take his
horse and wagon down to the Katy Depot up on South
Flores. And in those days, people used to travel
for a couple of weeks or so, and they used trunks and
big suitcases. And it was a custom of the railroad
people that they would hire these wagons, horse
drawn vehicles, to deliver the trunks and the
suitcases to the addresses. And that's how my
grandfather made a living. And then
my father, he came from Mexico also. He was born
over there. And the
four brothers of my mother were skilled in bicycle
mechanics and in other words they could do more
with their hands and because they didn't have the
education and in those days they had the bicycle
races from san antonio to new raffles or seguin you
know and uh so uh my father was one of those that
wanted to ride the bicycles and he met the boys and
then he met my mother and so
So my father was, he could read music. And he was a
drummer. And he gave lessons too. And I learned how
to play drums. And he worked in a grocery store in
San Antonio. But on weekends he had his band and
they'd play at dances. What kind of music did they
play? or dance music. And so they had a good
following and someone decided that hey, if you
fellas dress up like Charles you can go on a tour.
And we'll get an agent to go ahead and book you at
those days there were night clubs. Sure enough
they got the uniforms and they went on a trip and
they were gone two years, believe it or not.
Finally the end of the tour came up and it was closed
and the musicians began to come home, except my
father. He decided to stay up there. Up where? I
think it was Chicago. And he stayed over there and
then later we found out that he asked for a divorce.
My mother didn't know which way to go. They had no
advisors or anything.
But divorce was granted, and so that was the end of
him. How many brothers and sisters do you have? I
have one brother and two sisters. And what part of
San Antonio did you grow up in? Westside.
Westside. San Antonio was divided. All the black
people moved to the east side. All the Hispanics
went to the west side. So whenever there was any
repairs to streets and so forth, we were the last
ones to get it. And then the well-to-do were on the
north side. And then there was mostly Anglos that
lived in the south side. Okay, so I recall that the
Ursuline Academy had a tower, and it had four
sides, and there was a clock that you could see from
the, and there was a clock on the east and west and
south side, but none on the north. Well, why was
that? Well, you see, there was nothing on the north
side except just jungle and mesquite.
Jackrabbits, deer, and so forth. So who wanted to
see the time over there? And so people ask that
question to this day. Okay, so when I was eight
years old, I was the oldest, my grandmother
decided that I had to go out and make some dickles
and dimes. So the only thing I could do was go and
sell newspapers. And I got to a period where I knew
just about the name of every street. And my
playmates were, one was Jewish, three were
Anglos, and two were black. So I picked up English
just like that, see. So when they put me in school, I
just overheard some of the teachers doing recess.
They said, I wonder how Ralph got to speak so good
English. He said, all the rest of the other
Hispanics, they're having trouble, you know,
communicating. And they couldn't understand why
I could be, okay.
I went to the grades, and
I went to UNF Austin Elementary School. And
I recall that there was one student there that was
very nice and friendly, and his name And it was
Gonzales, just like mine, but with a Z at the end.
And he became Congressman Gonzales. Henry B. And
then there was Albert Pena. And Albert Pena, he
became a judge in the municipal court. And let's
see, there was Edward Neary. His dad was, he worked
for the Yellow Cab Company. and he was a starter
there at the San Anthony Hotel. And I just happened
to bump into him because I was running around
selling newspapers. Mr. Neary, he was Hispanic,
but he could pass for an Anglo because he was of this
complexion. And these yellow cabs were lined up on
the street, so when one of the clients there at the
San Anthony Hotel wanted to go somewhere, he was
the starter. And so it
was a nice arrangement. I mean, going to school and
learning and this kind of thing. And my
grandmother always wanted me to be a mail carrier.
And I don't know why. I actually figured it was a
sure thing. It was a good job.
I didn't think much of being a mail carrier. So, I
grew up and went to school and I had to sell papers in
the afternoon. I wanted to take- Which paper was
that? Which paper? Both. The San Antonio Union
News and the San Antonio Light. Both were the
afternoon then? Well, in those days, They had
editions. Oh, that's right. About every two
hours, two or three hours. We had the street
edition, the noon edition, the afternoon
edition, the financial edition, and the last one,
final. And a lot of people didn't want to buy the
paper in the daytime. They wanted the financial
because they wanted to see what the stock market
had now. Did you stand on the street corner selling
it, or did you deliver them? Oh no, I saw them on the
street. You see, I could have gotten a route on a
bicycle, the paper was only two cents, but I didn't
have the money for a bicycle, and we were poor, I
tell you. So I saw my papers on the street. And you
learn to fight. Because there's always some bully
that wants to, or one that doesn't want to do
nothing and to go out there and put you in a corner
and take your money away. Or to tear your papers or
whatever. So at the beginning I was afraid and I
would cry. Then I saw some other boys that wouldn't
put up with it and they'd fight. So I started
hitting back, and I found out that the bullies
backed off when they saw that I was fighting.
Anyway, and to this day, to this day, I notice that
among the Hispanics, they're ready to fight.
Because when they're growing up, they're abused,
they're kicked around, discriminated against,
and all these ugly things that happen to people who
live at the poverty level. So I wanted to take part
in sports. And so I wanted to very much to play
baseball. And I wasn't good at basketball. I
wanted to play baseball and football, but I
couldn't because I had to go sell papers and make
some wrinkles and dyes for lunch the next day and
whatever. Now which high school did you go to? San
Antonio Vocational and Technical High School,
which was later changed to Fox Tech. So things were
pretty hard there. At that time they were just
trying to come out of the Depression. Franklin
Delano Roosevelt was doing everything he could to
put people to work. So I became a high school
dropout. And I sold papers in downtown San
Antonio. And there was a Sellers Drugstore No. 2,
Wagner's Drugstore, and the Robert E. Lee Hotel.
And so for two years, I was out. And so finally, I
realized that I couldn't get a job because I didn't
have a, they always asked me, well, did you finish
high school? Do you have a high school degree? No.
So I told him, look, I'm going to have to go back to
school and find some kind of job after. Well, I went
back to Fox Tech. Well, it was still San Antonio
Technical School. And I finally made it. What year
did you finish high school? 1937. And I was 21. So
then things started to change. And I
got a job working, I started working after school
at night, working for the Monument Chevrolet
Company on Florence and Martin. Joe and Harry
Freeman owned that business. And that worked.
ten, sometimes twelve bays or stalls where
mechanics worked. And my job was to clean up the
stalls with grease, get the trash out, and I'd work
right after school until about eleven or twelve
o'clock at night. What was your pay, do you
remember? Yes, sir. The mechanics would pay me
fifty cents a week, and the company paid me four.
And it ended up with ten dollars.
And you know ten dollars was money then, you see. So
sometimes I'd go to sleep in class because of them.
So I quit and I went to California thinking I'd get a
better job over there. It didn't pan out so I came
back. Now I hopped the freight. And I went over
there to Los Angeles, but I had to get off in, I can't
think of the name right now, because the bulls were
out there picking up hobos and everything. So I had
to take a streetcar or a bus to go into L.A. And when I
had to come back, it was the same way. And I had to die
because the yards, the railroads, They were full
of police, you know, and they were picking up these
vagrants, you know, and some of them would break in
those boxcars and steal what was inside. So I came
back to San Antonio and the
boss that I had there said, look, we got a boy here
that took your job. But the parts department,
Frank Wyatt, he needs somebody that can talk
Spanish over there in the parts department. I had
experience working on cars. I knew parts and
everything. So Mr. Wyatt said, I'd like to have you
come over here. You have a good memory, you
remember numbers, and you're bilingual. So I
started ten dollars a week. I wore a shirt and tie
then, you know, and so Mr. White, he would go visit
the garages over on the west side, you know, to
solicit business and also tell them, hey, I've got
a place over here on Forest and Martin. And I'm
giving you a regular 25% discount, and if we don't
have the parts, we'll get them for you from the
other dealers, or we will order them for you. So
sure enough, I had some of those Hispanic
mechanics had a limited English vocabulary, and
they could express better in their own tongues.
And so they tell me, I want this and this and this for
a white model car. And the word got around, see,
because at that time I didn't make a, I didn't do any
research. In the contacts I had with the other
automotive supply dealers, stores, I was the only
one. I was the only Mexican that was working in the
Forest Department, see. And pretty soon Pretty
soon, people from Mexico were coming over. And of
course, Harry Freeman used to talk to them about
selling them new cars, new trucks. And I remember
one of them came in there to buy a 1940
Chevrolet four-door sedan. And the price was
$940. So, I
worked there in the parts department, and people
were coming there from Mexico to buy parts to take
back to Mexico. And some of them would, they would
ask for different information, and they would
send correspondence. They had other Hispanics
working there, see, but they didn't know. And that
is, they couldn't translate. So they called me,
they said, well, what does this guy say here? He
says this and this and this. Okay, well listen, can
we call him on the telephone or something? So
that's what I was doing. Then the war came. Then the
war, well not yet. We
had something like three or four automobile
dealers in Mexico that were having difficulty
getting parts from the factory back in the States.
It was a slow procedure, so they would come to us to
order big parts. to order Pontiac parts, this kind
of thing. So, and so I got the promotion until 19,
just before the war. I would make $25 a week. Hey,
that was good. So every payday I'd give my mama $15
and I'd keep $10. And my first car was a 1928
Chevrolet. It was old, but it would take me there
and bring me back. And nobody else in my
neighborhood had anything. They had bicycles,
you see. Well, so the war broke out, and on weekends
I would drive a wrecker. And every time we had a
police radio.
Every time there was a call, we'd say, car
so-and-so,
go to this intersection. And that was for a major
accident. And there were other garages that had
the same thing. They would rush out there. And
whoever got there first, usually would get the
car. So that was a Sunday. It was late, maybe about 5
o'clock. And I heard these boys hollering, you
know. I didn't know what the heck they were
hollering about, you know, because we were
listening to the radio. So one of the boys brought a
paper and says, Pearl Harbor bombed. And I didn't
get the significance of it, see. It had maybe one or
two paragraphs, and it says, the radio became
silent on contact. to San Antonio, Los Angeles,
and it wore. Yeah. So, it wasn't long. It was, let me
see, about a week, week and a half. The draft board
number two sent me a card. Greetings. Report to the
draft board so and so for induction. So I went to
Harry Freeman and says, meet up. I'm helping the
family out, then can you maybe talk to the draft
board and give me an extension or something. Well,
Freeman called me in and says he wouldn't do it. So
then the parts manager says, look, with the
knowledge you have about Chevrolet parts, or
General Motors parts, he says, don't go to the
draft board. They'll put you in the infantry and
they'll make you German fodder. Cannon fodder. He
says, Hitler's boys are going to shoot you. They
told me that in a joking manner. He says, the best
thing for you to do, you go sign up now and tell them
you want to go into the ordnance department.
That's where they got all the vehicles. Well, I did
that. Now, when did you volunteer? Do you remember
when that was? Well, January 17, 1942. And so I
wanted to get in and go into the ordnance and, hey,
let me do my stuff, you know, before I know what to
do. But that never came about. It never came about.
And I requested it in writing and everything. And
they wouldn't accept me. At the same time, I had a
cousin of mine that went in, and he wanted to be an
airplane mechanic. And he was telling me later, he
says, they lined us up. And we said, I'd count off.
And I said, I was counting. He said, start with 50. I
said, all right. You guys are going to the Cooks and
Baker School. And he says, I don't want to go. I
don't want to be a baker or a cook. He says, I want to
be an airplane mechanic. Well, that's where he
went. Someplace up in Alabama. Had a school over
there. So we got to, let me see, we turned over to
Dodd Field, which was adjacent to Fort Sam
Houston. And there we got inducted and gave us the
uniform. And my past life was too long, the uniform
didn't, you know. So I got, I think it was a couple of
days off. I went home and I had my mother, you know,
alter the fine things. So they put me on the train to
go up to Paine Field, Washington. This was in
Everett, Washington. The day it was called, the
day it was changed to Everett Air Base. And so
that's where we were sent. And instead of going to
Aberdeen and train, you know, this kind of thing,
and learn close art of drill and so forth, there was
a first sergeant there at Peyton Field that he had
some time in the Army. And because of the
restrictions and because of the inadequacy of the
basic, they made a training field, a training
base. And so they got this first sergeant to teach
us close order drill and learn how to
break down or disarm small arms and rifles.
Because we were going to be armorers. And so this is
what happened. So then in
June, we were to ship out. So we got our orders to be
sure to check all our equipment, our clothes and
everything, and get it ready. And everybody was
asking, I mean, the troops were asking the First
Royal General or anybody else there. Where are we
going? We're shipping out, but where? They
wouldn't tell us. Then we got a notice on the
bulletin board from the supply sergeant, come on
over there and pick up your mosquito bars. That did
it. I said, I know where we're going. Oh boy, we're
going to the southwest Pacific area, and sure
enough. So, and we were half scared and worried
because We heard all kind of ugly stories that the
Japanese were committing atrocities and how they
would torture American soldiers. And boy, it was
awful. But anyway, we just had to do the best we can.
So we went on the USS West Point. It was a liner, but
it was a It was converted to a troop ship, and I don't
know how many were on it, but it was a whole bunch of
people. And we noticed that some of them were
musicians, you know, they had accordions and
everything. But the top stoop of the ship was for
officers and nurses, see. Oh, I tell you, we wanted
to talk to the girls too, you know, but off limits,
can't do it. So we got to Melbourne, Australia. It
took us fifteen days to go across, and we had one
submarine scare. We were expecting a torpedo to
hit from a Japanese submarine, but it never
occurred. So we got into Melbourne, and there was
no place for us to stay. They had a place called
ASCOT, A-S-C-O-T, Speedway. And it was a
racetrack, really. It was a stadium. And that's
where we stayed. It was cold as hell, I tell you.
See, the weather was the opposite from the States.
And they got some cannabis. And they made some
walls, windbreakers is what they were really,
because the wind was coming in and it was chilly, I
don't mean. And we'd sleep with our uniform and
overcoat to keep warm. And so finally we got our
orders to move up. Now we have Australia,
I guess you already know Austria has a province or a
state, and the gauge of the railroad is one width.
And when you get to the border to go into the other,
the gauge changes. I said, my God. So we had to
unload everything, trucks and everything, drive
along, and get on one or the other train. And then
they had to stop. and the engineer or somebody up in
the front came out with a can of oil